---
student_name: Kai Mütschele
topic: Policies on Digital Commons
---
# The Variety of Global Public Policies in Favour of Digital Commons

The variety of global public policies in favour of Digital Commons can be categorized into four main areas: legal frameworks, financing schemes, provision of infrastructure and technical support, and educational and capacity-building measures. This reflection explores each category in greater detail and provides examples of policies from around the globe. In a last step, it attempts to characterise the common criteria of successful policies on Digital Commons.

## Legal Frameworks

Governments worldwide have introduced legal frameworks to encourage or mandate the use of open-source licenses for publicly funded software, research, and data. Additionally, policies have been established promoting broader exceptions for the educational, research, and non-commercial use of copyrighted materials. A notable example is France's [Loi pour une République numérique](https://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/eli/loi/2016/10/7/2016-1321/jo) (Digital Republic Law), which mandates the default opening of public data, requiring administrations to make their data accessible to the public. This legislation also encourages the use of open formats and standards to enhance interoperability and reuse. Building on this, France introduced the [Free Software and Digital Commons](https://www.numerique.gouv.fr/) action plan in 2021. This plan aims to support the state's digital transformation by fostering the use and development of free software and Digital Commons. Key objectives of the policy include promoting the design and adoption of free software, encouraging the release of source codes, and enhancing the quality and transparency of public services through reliance on open-source software.

## Financial Support Schemes

Financial schemes – such as grants, subsidies, tax incentives, or even prize competitions – are crucial to foster and maintain Digital Commons. By offering direct and indirect funding to developers, maintainers, and organizations involved in Digital Commons, these initiatives achieve two critical goals: on the one hand, creating an environment in which the development of Digital Commons flourishes and, on the other hand, addressing the challenge to sustain such projects in the long-term. A prominent example of a financial scheme is [Horizon Europe](https://ec.europa.eu/programmes/horizon2020/), the EU’s flagship funding program for research and innovation: With a budget of €95.5 billion (2021–2027), Horizon Europe prioritizes open science by mandating open access to scientific publications and encouraging the sharing of research data, software, and methodologies. A recent national example of a funding scheme is the [German Sovereign Tech Fund](https://sovereigntechfund.de/) – established in 2022. The initiative aims at strengthening and sustaining open digital infrastructure by providing financial support to open-source software projects. So far, the Sovereign Tech Fund has invested over €23 million in 60 open technologies such as maintaining the [Log4j library]( https://www.sovereign.tech/news/log4j-investment).

## Infrastructure and Technical Support

The provision of secure and sustainable hosting services for Digital Commons is another essential task for legislators as such support ensures the long-term viability, security, and effectiveness of Digital Commons. France’s [BlueHats](https://bluehats.gitlab.io/) initiative, for instance, offers infrastructure and technical support for open-source software by connecting actors in the Open Source Community. On a regional level, the city of Barcelona’s [Open-Source Program Office](https://ajuntament.barcelona.cat/digital/en/digital-transformation) promotes the adoption and maintenance of open-source solutions within municipal operations. A notable outcome is the successful implementation of the [Decidim](https://decidim.org) platform, a participatory democracy tool that is now used globally. Through such policies, (regional) governments demonstrate their capacity to sustain Digital Commons. This can also be understood as an attempt to tackle the [bus problem](https://www.equalexperts.com/blog/our-thinking/breaking-free-from-the-bus-factor/) – i.e., the reliance on very few individuals, whose (voluntary or involuntary) departure might otherwise be a death sentence for a Digital Common.

## Educational and Capacity-Building Measures

Lastly, educational and capacity-building initiatives aim to equip individuals and communities with the knowledge, skills, and resources necessary to create, contribute to, and effectively utilize Digital Commons. UNESCO exemplifies this approach through its capacity-building workshops and online training programs, which target educators, policymakers, and civil society organizations: The [OER Academy](https://www.oercommons.org/) trains educators to design and publish open educational materials using Creative Commons licenses, while the [Global OER Graduate Network](https://oerknowledgecloud.org/) partners with universities to prepare future educators for contributing to and using Open Educational Resources (OER). These programs notably prioritize developing countries, particularly in Africa and Asia, to bridge the global digital divide and empower underrepresented communities via open-source technology.

## What Makes for a “Successful” Digital Commons Policy?

Based on the different policies discussed, one can identify several key criteria determining the success of a government’s efforts to support Digital Commons:

1. **Accessibility** is crucial, as Digital Commons must be openly and widely available to all potential users regardless of socio-economic status, technical knowledge, or geographical location. Thus, governments ought to mandate open standards, prioritize the development of secure, user-friendly platforms, and actively encourage their usage to minimize barriers of entry.

2. To avoid the ‘bus problem,’ policies must ensure the presence of stable financial and sustainable technical support for creators and maintainers of Digital Commons. Dedicated grants or the encouragement of public-private partnerships are mechanisms to avoid a “Tragedy of the Commons” ([Ostrom, 1990](https://press.princeton.edu/books/paperback/9780691001296/governing-the-commons)).

3. It is necessary to integrate national, regional, or even local Digital Commons policies with broader national and international efforts to ensure coherence and prevent fragmentation. As is already the case, governments ought to cooperate in developing Digital Commons whenever needs and requirements align. This has not only a cost-benefit advantage but also connects the Digital Commons communities across borders.

In sum, policies in support of Digital Commons must be designed in consideration of the people that create and maintain them. Only via careful policy design and implementation can we maximize the potential of Digital Commons to promote equitable access to software, sustainable innovation, and community-driven development.
